<!-- RESULTS -->

To understand general principles of how intervention influences circuit inference, we simulated networks of nodes with linear interactions. Each node abstractly represents a population of neurons, and is driven by "private" independent Gaussian noise sources as well as weighted inputs from other connected nodes. Connections between nodes are represented, equivalently, as an adjacency matrix and a directed graph (see @fornito2016connectivity, Methods [# representations & reachability](REF-SECTION-HERE)). Open-loop intervention is simulated to mimic current injection from an external source, and by default has amplitudes sampled at each timestep from a Gaussian distribution (see Methods [# implementing interventions](REF-SECTION-HERE)). We describe the impact of intervention in terms of its influence on the observed patterns of pairwise correlation, and for closed-loop control also in terms of its modifications to the effective connectivity of the network (see Methods [# predicting correlation](REF-SECTION-HERE)). While this linear Gaussian network simplifies away several features of biophysical networks of spiking neurons, we believe it provides a reasonable and tractable theoretic foundation for building towards understanding more complex systems (see Discussion [# spiking networks](REF-SECTION-HERE) for a discussion of broader modeling assumptions such as spiking and time-lagged interactions).

These networks are simulated over time, and pairwise correlations are quantified as a basic measurement of statistical dependence. While more sophisticated inference procedures are commonly applied in neuroscience, studying key properties such as shaping across-node dependence should illustrate principles which generalize across inference methods. In particular, we use these networks to illustrate the process of designing and conducting experiments with interventions to discover neural circuitry. We start by walking through an example of using correlations to distinguish between 3 circuit hypothesis. Then we distill this process into a general recipe for an identification experiment. This recipe is then applied to a more general problem of choosing where and how to intervene to decided between a set of candidate circuit hypotheses. We demonstrate cases where closed-loop control provides categorical and quantitative advantages for such experiments.
